We are trying to predict whether or not a given customer will subscribe to a term deposit. We have a dataset consisting of information about each customer as well as information regarding their interactions with the call centre. The dataset is incredibly unbalanced with fewer than 8% of customers making a deposit (as can be seen from the ‘y’ value count in the notebook) . For that reason, we are not simply trying to build an accurate model (you could do that by just guessing “no” for each customer), but rather to order customers based on the probabilities which the model assigns to them of making a term deposit. It is imperative that amongst the top percentiles of this list the recall is very high as this means that we will not miss any customers who will make a term deposit.  We can cut off the lower percentiles as these customers are highly unlikely to make a term deposit and not calling them will save time and money. 

Given the tabular nature of the data and the fact that we are building a binary classifier, we have chosen to use an Extreme Gradient Boosted Classifier which has been shown to have high levels of accuracy on tabular data. Before we can build the model however, we must first explore the dataset and process any categorical data. We begin by plotting box and whisker plots for each of the numerical variables in order to study outliers. We can see from the box and whisker plots for the numerical variables of average annual bank balance, duration of last contact, customer age, and number of contacts during the campaign have a huge number of outliers. This illustrates the enormous size and spread of the dataset. We will not be disregarding any outliers at this time, due to the large number of them (important information may be lost if they are disregarded). Next we must study the cardinality of the categorical variables. If the cardinality of a categorical variable is high, then a simple one-hot-encoding of said variable would not be appropriate as it would lead to the curse of high-dimensionality. Instead we must investigate which values of the categorical variables are associated with a percentage of yeses higher than the average of just under 8%. This allows us to group categorical values into high yes percentage values and low yes percentage values. This greatly reduces cardinality and allows for relationships between variables and outcomes to be preserved. As can be seen from the grouped job counts, the people who are not working (retired, student, unemployed) are the ones most likely to make a term deposit. I have therefore grouped the jobs into working and not working. Similarly certain months (mar, oct, apr, feb)  have higher yes to no ratios than other months and as such I have grouped these into ‘high months’. 

Now that we have grouped and encoded the categorical variables appropriately, we can build and train an Extreme Gradient Boosted Tree Model. We start with a simple model in which we use the default hyper-parameters (no optimisation). We can see that this gives a poor 5-fold cross validated f1 score of  0.117. We use F1 score as it is more appropriate than accuracy for such an imbalanced dataset. Next we use Bayesian Optimisation with f1 as the scoring metric to tune the hyper-parameters. The optimised model has a 5-fold cross fold validated f1 score of 0.410.  The next step is to address the massive imbalance in the dataset. First we split the dataset into training and testing and then we downsample the ‘no’ data in the training dataset. After employing bayesian optimisation once again we get an f1 score of 0.459 across the test set. This still does not seem great, but we can nonetheless prove that this model is suitable for our purpose. We have put the customers in the test dataset into descending order of their probability of placing a term deposit (according to the model). When we did this we found that across the top 20% of the list we had a recall of 1.0. This means that we did not miss any positive cases and as such the model will be very useful for making money. By the nature of this kind of marketing campaign, most of the calls will result in a negative outcome. This means that the best that we can hope for is to call as many people as possible who have a high probability of making a term deposit and not calling the people who have a very low probability of making a term deposit. This model allows us to do just that and will in turn make money by helping us reach the right people and save money by not bothering to contact people who are unlikely to make a term deposit. We can see from our cumulative lift curve that the model performs as expected when the customers are ordered by probability.

Next we carried out a feature importance study. The four most important features were duration of last contact, bank balance, last contact day of the month, and customer age. We cannot use duration for segmentation as there is an implication that the longer the customer is willing to stay on the phone, the more likely they are to make a term deposit. We simply use this result to highlight the difference that a good phone call can make. We can see for the box and whisker plots made for the balance and age profiles that the people who should be targeted for calls are people of younger age with higher bank balance. There were no conclusions to be drawn for last contact day.


Finally we need to see what happens when we do not include call duration in the model. This is because ultimately we would like to be able to predict whether or not someone is likely to make a term deposit before they are called for the first time (to avoid making any unnecessary calls). We follow the same procedure as before and we find that (as expected), that the f1 score has drastically decreased relative to the previous model. However still have perfect recall for our customers of high probability. It is worth pointing out that the optimised model has lower F1 score and accuracy than the non-optimised model, but it has higher recall scores for customers of high probability.

The entire project is in a single Jupyter Notebook. Simply replace the file path with your file path in the second cell and run each cell sequentially. Please see Requirments.txt for library versions. 


